# Executive Summary

This comparative study looks into the proposed “vaccine passport”
initiative from various human rights aspects. It was undertaken by the
Global Digital Human Rights Network, an action started under the EU’s
Cooperation in Science and Technology programme. The network currently
unites more than 80 scholars and practitioners from 40 countries. The
findings are based on responses to questions put to the network members
by the authors of this study in February 2021 ([questions attached in
Annex](#heading-76)). We acknowledge individual contributions from colleagues
(listed in the table of contributors above), whose views are sometimes
presented in a generalised fashion.

The study concentrated on the availability of a legal framework for the
proposed “vaccine passport”, whether such a “passport” would create
binding obligations in the public and private sectors or, alternatively,
what would be the scope of discretion allowed to public and private
entities to make their decisions affecting rights holders’ access to
various services. The attitudes prevalent in different states and in the
media were also analysed, along with the aspects that need to be
considered to avoid potential human rights violations.

There has been no thorough analysis in most countries as to whether a
normative national basis exists to restrict fundamental rights through
the requirement of having a “vaccine passport” to access certain
locations or services. Compatibility of the proposed passport with
European and/or international human rights rules and principles is a
marginal issue in public discourse. Conceptualisation about such
compatibility remains general and theoretical, and has not reached the
level of practicality and effectiveness. Most countries have not enacted
concrete legislative acts or provisions to deal with a pandemic of this
scale and magnitude.

The findings indicate a complete absence in the EU countries and
selected countries outside of the EU of the normative basis in national
legal systems which would obligate private companies to enforce
restrictions originating from the “vaccine passport”. This legal vacuum
– provided that such a “vaccine passport” becomes sooner rather than
later a technical and medical reality – raises a subsequent concern as
to whether the private companies have the legal discretion to make
decisions regarding who to serve and who not to serve on their own
volition. This is not a question of a legal obligation to discriminate,
but a legally allowed freedom to discriminate. Provided that normative
concretisation of such a “vaccine passport” within national legal
systems and/or in the EU level is unable to run in parallel with the
accelerated practical requests for such a “passport” from private
entities, we see a real threat of the “private” profiling of citizens
and exploitation of their vulnerabilities for commercial purposes. The
concern, which legal scholarship has been aware of for decades – the
compatibility of private business interests with the obligation to
safeguard human rights when doing business – finds its clear
manifestation when the EU is faced with the quest to find a solution to
the pandemic crisis via the “vaccine passport”.

The fundamental concern is that the “vaccine passport” can lead to
everyday discriminatory choices by individuals, the public, and private
entities, which in turn become deeply rooted discriminatory patterns
either in practice or law or both. There is a theoretical dilemma and,
for many, a practical issue how to realise one’s fundamental rights to
refuse medical treatment and not to know one’s medical condition when
having a “vaccine passport” is a utilitarian pre-condition for social
participation. We caution against the possibility of public and private
“lists” created on the basis of “passports”. The sooner such “passports”
are issued in normative vacuum or fragmentation, the greater the threat
of profiling. If blockchain technology is to be used for such profiling,
it can lead to “vaccine prisons”.

Challenges related to *safeguards* during implementation primarily
concern the purposeful use of gathered medical data. A clear and
specific normative basis is necessary, since the generally worded
legislative or constitutional level norms may not be sufficient to
protect personal data.