![](./media/image1.png){width="2.204861111111111in"
height="0.3736111111111111in"}![](./media/image2.png){width="1.515152012248469in"
height="0.6154877515310586in"}![](./media/image3.jpeg){width="1.913888888888889in"
height="0.48055555555555557in"}

![](./media/image4.gif){width="2.2259514435695538in"
height="0.5321916010498687in"}![](./media/image5.gif){width="2.000980971128609in"
height="0.5347222222222222in"}

![](./media/image6.gif){width="2.4097222222222223in"
height="0.5243766404199475in"}

c

**\
**

![](./media/image2.png){width="1.515152012248469in"
height="0.6154877515310586in"}![](./media/image1.png){width="2.204861111111111in"
height="0.3736111111111111in"}![](./media/image3.jpeg){width="1.913888888888889in"
height="0.48055555555555557in"}

„All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.“

Art. 1, sentence 1, Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)

**\
**

![](./media/image3.jpeg){width="1.913888888888889in"
height="0.48055555555555557in"}![](./media/image1.png){width="2.204861111111111in"
height="0.3736111111111111in"}![](./media/image2.png){width="1.7208333333333334in"
height="0.6990398075240595in"}

**\
Cite as:** Mart Susi and Tiina Pajuste (eds.), Covid-19 “Vaccine
Passports”: An Exploratory Study of 23 Countries (Tallinn: Tallinn
University, 2021)

This is GDHRNet Working Paper \#2 in a series of publication in the
framework of GDHRNet edited by Mart Susi and Matthias C. Kettemann.
GDHRNet is funded as EU COST Action – CA19143 – by the European Union.

ISSN XXX-XXXX

Cover illustration: The cover shows the first line of Art. 1 of the UDHR
rendered in barcode using barcode-generator.de (Design: Matthias C.
Kettemann)

CC BY SA 4.0

![CC-by-nc-nd](./media/image7.png){width="1.0375in"
height="0.3659722222222222in"} 

All working papers can be downloaded from GDHRNet.eu and
leibniz-hbi.de/GDHRNet.

[]{#_Toc468205615 .anchor}

**Publisher:** Tallinn University

> Narva mnt 25, 10120 Tallinn
>
> [www.tlu.ee](http://www.tlu.ee)

**EU COST Action – CA19143: Global Digital Human Rights Network **

The GDHRNet COST Action will systematically explore the theoretical and
practical challenges posed by the online context to the protection of
human rights. The network will address whether international human
rights law is sufficiently detailed to enable governments and private
online companies to understand their respective obligations vis-à-vis
human rights protection online. It will evaluate how national
governments have responded to the task of providing a regulatory
framework for online companies and how these companies have transposed
the obligation to protect human rights and combat hate speech online
into their community standards. The matters of transparency and
accountability will be explored, through the lens of corporate social
responsibility.

The Action will propose a comprehensive system of human rights
protection online, in the form of recommendations of the content
assessment obligation by online companies, directed to the companies
themselves, European and international policy organs, governments and
the general public. The Action will also develop a model which minimises
the risk of arbitrary assessment of online content and instead
solidifies standards which are used during content assessment; and
maximises the transparency of the outcome.

The Action will achieve scientific breakthroughs (a) by means of a
quantitative and qualitative assessment of whether private Internet
companies’ provide comparable protection of human rights online in
comparison with judicial institutions, and (b) in the form of a novel
holistic theoretical approach to the potential role of artificial
intelligence in protecting human rights online, and (c) by providing
policy suggestions for private balancing of fundamental rights online.

**Contact:** Dr Mart SUSI, Action Chair, <mart.susi@tlu.ee>

> Dr Vygante MILASIUTE, Action Vice Chair, <vygante.milasiute@tf.vu.lt>
>
> Ms Laurena KALAJA, Science Communications Manager,
> <laurenakalaja@hotmail.com>

Contributors
============

  **Country**              **Authors**
  ------------------------ -----------------------------------------------------------------
  Argentina                Oscar Raúl Puccinelli
  Albania                  Anisia Mandro, Laurena Kalaja
  Bosnia and Herzegovina   Sejla Maslo Cerkic
  Cyprus                   Konstantinos Kouroupis
  Estonia                  Tiina Pajuste, Mart Susi
  Finland                  Jukka Viljanen, Riku Neuvonen
  France                   Meryem Marzouki
  Germany                  Martin Fertmann, Matthias Kettemann, Anna Zapfe
  Greece                   Manos Dimogerontakis, Alexandros Varveris, Georgios Yannopoulos
  Iceland                  Halldóra Þorsteinsdóttir
  Ireland                  Jennifer Kavanagh
  Italy                    Graziella Romeo, Federico Costantini
  Lithuania                Vygantė Milašiūtė , Deimilė Prapiestytė, Skirgailė Žalimienė
  Malta                    Jasper Schellekens, Krista Bonello Rutter Giappone
  Portugal                 Paula Veiga, Alexandre L Dias Pereira
  Romania                  Flavia Ghencea *et al*
  Serbia                   Jelena Simić, Violeta Beširević, Marijana Mladenov
  Slovakia                 Barbora Badurová
  Slovenia                 Pika Šarf, Aleš Završnik
  South Africa             Cathleen Powell, Stuart Jones
  Spain                    Celia Fernández Aller, Beatriz Peña-Acuña
  Turkey                   Mutlu Binark
  United Kingdom           Nikolas Thomopoulos

Table of Contents
=================

[Contributors 5](#contributors)

[Table of Contents 6](#table-of-contents)

[Statement by Toomas Hendrik Ilves
7](#statement-by-toomas-hendrik-ilves)

[Introduction and Synopsis 8](#introduction-and-synopsis)

[Discourse Regarding an EU-wide “Vaccination Passport”
9](#discourse-regarding-an-eu-wide-vaccination-passport)

[Challenges for Human Rights Protection Created by a Potential “Vaccine
Passport”
15](#challenges-for-human-rights-protection-created-by-a-potential-vaccine-passport)

[The Existence of a Normative Basis for Obliging Private Companies to
Enforce Restrictions Originating from the “Vaccine Passport”
18](#the-existence-of-a-normative-basis-for-obliging-private-companies-to-enforce-restrictions-originating-from-the-vaccine-passport)

[The Existence of a Normative Basis to Impose Restrictions on the Basis
of the “Vaccine Passport” in the Exercise of Fundamental Rights in
Public Space and Accessing Public Services
19](#the-existence-of-a-normative-basis-to-impose-restrictions-on-the-basis-of-the-vaccine-passport-in-the-exercise-of-fundamental-rights-in-public-space-and-accessing-public-services)

[Main Practical Challenges and Fundamental Concerns – from a Human
Rights Perspective – Connected with the Idea of the “Vaccine Passport”
21](#main-practical-challenges-and-fundamental-concerns-from-a-human-rights-perspective-connected-with-the-idea-of-the-vaccine-passport)

[Recommendations 23](#recommendations)

[Annex 1. Questionnaire 24](#annex-1.-questionnaire)

\
=

Statement by Toomas Hendrik Ilves
=================================

History has shown that during crises decisions are often made, which
have far-reaching consequences and will for many decades continue to
affect the way of life of entire societies. These decisions are made
under time and social pressures. Social pressure mounting amidst the
current Covid-19 crisis calls for return to “normality”, which means the
way of life in the pre-crisis period. The proposed “vaccination
passport” is viewed by many as an instrument for such a return. Yet,
there are many challenges, primarily related to the protection of
sensitive personal data, potential abuse by private companies and
governments, and the need to avoid discrimination. The key to avoiding,
or minimize these threats lies in e-governance technological solutions.
Such solutions carry by default and design safeguards against profiling
and arbitrary application, thereby raising confidence among the
“passport holders” that privacy rights secure, and among those who
condition their use of these services upon the data entered into such
passports that the data is accurate and cannot be manipulated. I call
for decision makers on the global, European and national levels to
consider the usage of blockchain technologies or other comparable
solutions as the technological pillar of this necessary development. And
last but not least, I would like to emphasize the importance of
communication between political, academic, medical and civil society
circles. In this communication, the voice of academia as the guardian of
democratic values needs to be consistently heard.

Toomas Hendrik Ilves

*President of Estonia 2006-2016*

*Commissioner, WHO-Europe Pan-European Commission on Health and
Sustainable Development *

**Comparative Study of Covid-19 “Vaccine Passport” Discourses**

Mart Susi and Tiina Pajuste

TALLINN UNIVERSITY, ESTONIA

Introduction and Synopsis
=========================

This comparative study looks into the proposed “vaccine passport”
initiative from various human rights aspects. It was undertaken by the
Global Digital Human Rights Network, an action started under the EU’s
Cooperation in Science and Technology programme. The network currently
unites more than 80 scholars and practitioners from 40 countries. The
findings are based on responses to questions put to the network members
by the authors of this study in February 2021 (questions attached in
Annex I). We acknowledge individual contributions from colleagues
(listed in the table of contributors above), whose views are sometimes
presented in a generalised fashion.

The study concentrated on the availability of a legal framework for the
proposed “vaccine passport”, whether such a “passport” would create
binding obligations in the public and private sectors or, alternatively,
what would be the scope of discretion allowed to public and private
entities to make their decisions affecting rights holders’ access to
various services. The attitudes prevalent in different states and in the
media were also analysed, along with the aspects that need to be
considered to avoid potential human rights violations.

There has been no thorough analysis in most countries as to whether a
normative national basis exists to restrict fundamental rights through
the requirement of having a “vaccine passport” to access certain
locations or services. Compatibility of the proposed passport with
European and/or international human rights rules and principles is a
marginal issue in public discourse. Conceptualisation about such
compatibility remains general and theoretical, and has not reached the
level of practicality and effectiveness. Most countries have not enacted
concrete legislative acts or provisions to deal with a pandemic of this
scale and magnitude.

The findings indicate a complete absence in the EU countries and
selected countries outside of the EU of the normative basis in national
legal systems which would obligate private companies to enforce
restrictions originating from the “vaccine passport”. This legal vacuum
– provided that such a “vaccine passport” becomes sooner rather than
later a technical and medical reality – raises a subsequent concern as
to whether the private companies have the legal discretion to make
decisions regarding who to serve and who not to serve on their own
volition. This is not a question of a legal obligation to discriminate,
but a legally allowed freedom to discriminate. Provided that normative
concretisation of such a “vaccine passport” within national legal
systems and/or in the EU level is unable to run in parallel with the
accelerated practical requests for such a “passport” from private
entities, we see a real threat of the “private” profiling of citizens
and exploitation of their vulnerabilities for commercial purposes. The
concern, which legal scholarship has been aware of for decades – the
compatibility of private business interests with the obligation to
safeguard human rights when doing business – finds its clear
manifestation when the EU is faced with the quest to find a solution to
the pandemic crisis via the “vaccine passport”.

The fundamental concern is that the “vaccine passport” can lead to
everyday discriminatory choices by individuals, the public, and private
entities, which in turn become deeply rooted discriminatory patterns
either in practice or law or both. There is a theoretical dilemma and,
for many, a practical issue how to realise one’s fundamental rights to
refuse medical treatment and not to know one’s medical condition when
having a “vaccine passport” is a utilitarian pre-condition for social
participation. We caution against the possibility of public and private
“lists” created on the basis of “passports”. The sooner such “passports”
are issued in normative vacuum or fragmentation, the greater the threat
of profiling. If blockchain technology is to be used for such profiling,
it can lead to “vaccine prisons”.

Challenges related to *safeguards* during implementation primarily
concern the purposeful use of gathered medical data. A clear and
specific normative basis is necessary, since the generally worded
legislative or constitutional level norms may not be sufficient to
protect personal data.

Discourse Regarding an EU-wide “Vaccination Passport” 
======================================================

The topic of “vaccine passports” is emerging in all corners of the
world, but currently countries seem roughly split on whether there is or
is not discussion regarding an EU-wide (or global) “vaccination
passport”.[^1] There seems to be less discussion of a “vaccine passport”
outside of the European Union. For example, as of February 2021, neither
South Africa nor Argentina were discussing this topic and it was also
not under consideration in regional organisations, such as the African
Union, Mercosur and other inter-American bodies.[^2] In countries where
there has been no official discourse on the issue, one perceived reason
for this has been the slow rollout of the vaccination programme.[^3] In
such cases, the dialogue on “vaccine passports” is seen as premature as
the focus of governments and the media is mostly on the procurement of
vaccines and the logistics of the vaccination programmes. In general,
the perception is also that there should be free access to vaccines
before a “vaccine passport” could provide special rights or easier
access to certain venues or services (if people have no choice to
vaccinate the potential for discrimination is greater).

In some states, although official discussions are lacking, there is
coverage of the issue in the media.[^4] Discussions in the media reflect
a variety of positions and highlight both the strengths and weaknesses
of a potential standardised “vaccine passport”.

**Positive aspects** that are highlighted in discourse include, for
example, the idea that “vaccine passports” may offer a way to overcome
the economic crisis, especially in the tourism and leisure sectors.[^5]
Many proponents of a “vaccine passport” see it as a way to facilitate
travel in Covid-19 conditions. For example, the Spanish Minister of
Industry, Trade and Tourism, Reyes Maroto, said in relation to the idea
of a “vaccine passport” that “it could contribute to restoring mobility
at the European level”.[^6] Moreover, a Spanish journal, *El Diario*,
elaborates on two positive factors for Spain: travel and the economy are
promoted.[^7] In Malta, MEP Roberta Metsola (PN) has declared that
“proof of immunity will mean our economies can open up safely, quickly
and with confidence – meaning we can offer a lifeline to industries so
many families depend on”.[^8] In Cyprus the positive discourse regarding
an “EU-wide vaccination passport” has focused on the protection of
public health.[^9]

A positive technical aspect of “vaccine passports” that has been
highlighted is their potential to improve the verification aspects of
vaccinations. For example, a health politician from the SPD party in
Germany advanced “vaccination passports” as a means to prevent fraud
pertaining to someone’s vaccination status through the use of digital
verification measures (stating that the yellow, paper, WHO “vaccination
passports” used in Germany thus far are “*as easy to forge as student
IDs*”).[^10] Similarly, while there is concern that national systems of
vaccine passports would be inefficient because of their differences,
there is a belief that an EU-wide vaccination certificate would be
functional and fulfil its purpose.[^11] Proponents also note that there
are already requirements to provide documentation of certain
vaccinations for travelling to or entering from certain regions
(relating to yellow fever).[^12]

**Negative** aspects that are highlighted in discourse are, firstly, the
potential for discrimination, which is mentioned most often.[^13] For
example, the Spanish media has pointed out the discriminatory aspect of
a “vaccine passport” (e.g. letting people who are vaccinated travel
while forbidding those who are not) when vaccination has only just begun
and is voluntary in most states.[^14] Moreover, while the Lithuanian
Prime Minister Ingrida Šimonytė admitted the possible positive impact of
certificates such as a “vaccine passport”, as they would allow a part of
the population to be freed from quarantine requirements, she mentioned
that there are risks of possible discrimination and abuse of the system.
This was also the position of another Lithuanian MEP, Rasa Juknevičienė,
who noted that discrimination would be created if vaccination
certificates were introduced before a large part of the population was
vaccinated.[^15] The Serbian media reported a statement by the Director
of the World Health Organization’s (WHO) office in Serbia, who stressed
that the WHO is against the introduction of “Covid passports” because
not all countries and people enjoy access to vaccination to the same
degree.[^16]

As an example of another type of negative comment in relation to
“vaccine passports”, the former Albanian Minister of Health Leonard
Solis has spoken out against the “passport” due to unfeasibility and the
current stage of vaccine production, insufficiency with regards to
vaccine distribution and the still-existing doubts especially
*vis-a-vis* its effectiveness towards the new virus mutations. According
to Solis, this kind of initiative is premature and harmful, and it would
hurt the EU more than it would regulate the situation.[^17] The German
Ethics Council, an independent expert council instituted by the federal
government and the German Bundestag, decided that it is wrong to lift
Covid-19-related infection prevention measures for vaccinated people so
long as it is uncertain whether vaccinated people continue to pose a
risk of infection, stating that lifting restrictions for vaccinated
people alone could only be justified if it was sufficiently certain that
they cannot spread the virus.[^18]

Other negative aspects that were mentioned are the fear of creating a
“two-class society” (vaccinated/non-vaccinated) relating to infection
prevention rules; the perceived erosion of fundamental rights because
being vaccinated in order to be exempt from infection prevention rules
is viewed as creating a *de facto* obligation to get vaccinated;[^19]
and the potential for violations of basic human rights like freedom of
movement.[^20] Another potential issue of concern that has been noted in
discussions is that a “passport” with such health data has questionable
moral implications.[^21] In addition, significant concerns have been
raised in relation to the protection of personal (health) data.[^22]

Other discussions that have taken place in Europe look for
**alternatives** to a “vaccine passport”. For example, the idea of a
“green passport”[^23] (as in ‘green light’ and following the example of
Israel) or a “sanitary passport”[^24] is proposed and preferred to that
of a vaccination one, in that it would encompass additional (or
alternative) information such as a Covid-19 test result or an antibodies
test result.[^25] The broader concept is also put forth in Germany,
where the Federal Minister of Health Jens Spahn (CDU) has advanced the
broader idea of “immunity documentation” (i.e. a document that is also
for those who may have already acquired immunity through infection) in
May 2020, among others with the argument that this would be necessary to
enable German citizens to travel abroad as other countries would likely
demand such documents.[^26] The initiative was not followed through with
however, over criticism of lack of underlying scientific evidence.[^27]

In most researched states the **political parties** have not adopted an
official position in relation to a “vaccine passport”.[^28] Opinion
amongst politicians is divided, as is the case amongst experts and the
general population. In many states, governments have yet to formulate an
official position on the matter. In contrast, some states have presented
an official supportive stance. For example, the German federal
government (Bundesregierung) supports the idea of an EU-wide vaccination
“passport”.[^29] And the State Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Slovakia – Martin Klus – has declared that the Slovak
approach to the Covid-19 passport would be in line with EU
requirements.[^30] He pointed out that there is still ongoing discussion
and there would have to be negotiations regarding vaccines not
registered in EU. As Slovakia bought Sputnik V vaccines from Russia
(which is not yet approved by EU), there is also discussion whether the
state should use it and whether the “vaccine passport” would include
also these vaccines.[^31]

Greece has gone as far as to propose the idea of the “vaccine passport”
in the EU institutions, along with a declaration that in case the EU
does not accept this idea, Greece will conclude bilateral agreements
with other countries (such as the UK, Austria, Israel, etc.) for the
adoption of a “vaccine passport”.[^32] This firm position is
understandable due to the extensive role that tourism plays in the Greek
economy. The aim of the country is to support tourism during summertime
by attracting citizens from the countries that will have been
vaccinated, in order to avoid restrictive measures, such as a quarantine
or the obligation of a negative Covid-19 test.[^33]

**Private companies**, especially in the tourism sector, tend to be
supportive of the idea of an EU-wide “vaccine passport”, because it is
seen as a mechanism to “re-activate” the sector.[^34] The International
Air Transport Association is also in favour of this new “passport”.[^35]
The airline Lufthansa and Europe’s largest travel company, Tui, have
stated that they would not voluntarily establish an obligation to
provide such a document in order to use their services, but welcome a
clear solution on the European level.[^36] In Finland, the service
industry organisation PALTA has supported the “vaccine passport” and has
taken the stand that it could help those services that are heavily
impacted by the pandemic such as restaurants, the travel industry,
cultural services and event organisers.[^37] As another example, in
Italy tourism and sports companies are especially supportive of the idea
on the assumption that it would create a safe circulation of people and
financially help those sectors, without creating risks for the
population. One of the arguments used was, indeed, that “vaccine
passports” would make people feel comfortable in performing daily
activities, thus also improving the mental health of the population
severely impacted by Covid-19. Those arguments were, in particular,
supported by the President of the Italian Swimming Federation and the
President of Gymnastic Federation.[^38]

It is interesting to note that the positive view of “vaccine passports”
in the tourism sector is not universal. This is because some companies
perceive a potential obligation to have a “vaccine passport” as
excessive and more restrictive than the current situation. Some
companies have expressed a fear that such “passports” would only bring
additional restrictions to travelling and consequentially a decrease in
the number of travellers/customers.[^39] Moreover, the Malta Hotels and
Restaurants Association deemed the idea of a “vaccine passport”
excessive and suggested that a negative test result should suffice –
their main goal appears to be to lower the threshold for tourism.[^40]
Similar ideas are echoed in Finland by festival organisers, who have
accepted that a vaccination certificate would be an advantage compared
to the current situation, but they are not ready to support the position
that a vaccination “passport” should be a mandatory condition for
entry.[^41] As another example of a more sceptical position in the
private sector, in Germany the managing director of Dehoga (Germany’s
hotel and restaurant trade association) asserted that “\[t\]he debate is
premature because not everyone who wants to be vaccinated can do so yet.
(...) it makes no sense to restrict access to our operations to those
who have been vaccinated because relevant target groups have not yet
received vaccination or will not receive it in the foreseeable future.
Until then, there are numerous legal issues to be resolved”.[^42]

Some countries in Europe have already gone **beyond mere discussions**
of a “vaccine passport” and taken **specific action**. In addition to
the well-known case of the “green pass” of Israel, the Greek government
recently enforced new legislation for the vaccination certificate. This
is an official certificate given to each person who has already been
vaccinated. The procedure is not mandatory; however, each citizen who
has already been vaccinated may enter an electronic platform and submit
an application in order to obtain the aforementioned certificate.[^43]

In Finland, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health is preparing a
digital Covid-19 vaccination certificate. The certificate would be
available in the My Kanta Pages service (online health records system).
The plan is for the certificate to be either digital vaccination data, a
barcode, a QR code or a combination of these to be available in the My
Kanta Pages and people could display the certificate on their phones or
have it printed on paper.[^44]

In France, a draft law was proposed by the French government on December
21, 2020 and withdrawn the following day.[^45] The main controversial
provision allowed subjecting people’s movement, their access to some
transportation means, certain places and specific activities, to having
been tested negative or having undertaken a preventive or a curative
treatment, or having been vaccinated. This was considered by the public
to constitute a way to make vaccination mandatory, at a time when polls
indicated that only 40% of the French population intended to be
vaccinated, one of the lowest rates in the world.[^46]

Summing up, discourse in Europe and beyond has been mixed, focusing on
both the positive and negative aspects of a potential “vaccine
passport”. This is also reflected in the positions of politicians and
political parties, in the opinions of experts and the media, and in the
attitudes prevalent in the private sector.

Challenges for Human Rights Protection Created by a Potential “Vaccine Passport”
================================================================================

The main human rights challenges referred to in the data of our study
are: (a) the potential conflict with data protection/privacy; (b)
ensuring that the right to non-discrimination is upheld (especially in
the context of freedom of movement).

*Right to privacy*

Opinion is divided over whether a “vaccine passport” constitutes a new
type of instrument with corresponding new risks. Academics point out
that states already gather large amounts of data about the citizens’
health status, also concerning vaccination.[^47] Moreover, the practice
of documenting vaccinations and providing proof of such vaccinations,
especially when travelling, is also relatively well-established.
However, previously such documents have been on paper and the data
contained in them have not been shared amongst different states. It is
important to note, however, that digital uniform versions of vaccination
documents have been proposed even before Covid-19 due to the
impracticality of a paper document (e.g. ease of losing it; ease of
forging it). In addition, the requirement of producing a medical
certificate for accessing some services (e.g. health checks of children
and their guardians for the purpose of being admitted to certain
swimming pools, notably those providing physical therapy prescribed by a
physician) is also common in many states.[^48]

The main potential encroachment of the right to privacy in this context
is the obligation to share personal health information (e.g. when you
travel or want to access a venue or a service) to a wide range of people
and public or private entities. The **proportionality** of restrictions
of privacy in order to curb the spread of the virus has been widely
discussed in relation to “contact tracing” measures such as Covid-19
tracing apps and customer lists in restaurants (specifically
highlighting the potential for the reappropriation of such data for
non-health-related purposes such as criminal prosecution). It has been
pointed out that in comparison to the abovementioned measures, which are
widely considered proportional, the privacy implications of a Covid-19
passport seem rather limited. In most cases, the information when, where
and with what vaccine someone was vaccinated seems to allow
significantly less conclusions about this person than (especially
compiled) data on contacts or frequented locations that were widely
considered proportional.[^49]

In assessing the proportionality of a restriction of privacy, it is
necessary to identify whether the existence of a vaccination certificate
system increases health protection. Some authors have noted that
currently there is not enough scientific information available to know:
a) the effectiveness of vaccination against all the existing types
(variants) of the virus, and b) the time period of immunity.[^50]
Therefore, the necessity and effectiveness of the measure is not yet
proven, which makes a determination of proportionality difficult.

*Data protection*

A connected issue with the right to privacy is the problem of ensuring
personal data protection in relation to the potential “vaccine
passport”. States have different types of health data systems and if a
uniform “vaccine passport” is introduced in the EU or globally, many
domestic systems will need to adjust accordingly to ensure compatibility
and that data management is performed in accordance with the relevant
legal requirements.[^51] Safety of personal data in relation to the
“vaccine passport” must be ensured by technical (safeguards against data
leaks and other potential abuses) and legal (defining who and in what
manner gets access to personal data) means.[^52]

Some of the data protection questions that need to be considered are:
who are the data processors of the sensitive (health) data; what is the
legal basis for the processing of data; how long can the data be stored;
how are the principles of necessity and proportionality respected[^53];
and how to ensure the implementation of data protection rules by private
companies.[^54] A difficult balance has to be found between many
interests, among which individual privacy, public healthcare and
business interests are crucial, even if they are not the only ones.[^55]

*Non-discrimination*

One of the challenges that comes with a “vaccine passport” is to avoid
creating a system where vaccination against Covid-19 essentially becomes
mandatory and leads to discrimination towards those not willing or able
to get vaccinated.[^56] At this moment it is not yet clear whether the
document would be used merely for facilitating international travel, or
whether it would serve as a means of allowing or limiting access to
private and public spaces (which would have a substantial impact on
people’s daily lives).[^57] The potential human rights implications of
such a “passport” principally stem from individual uses of such a
document as a prerequisite for taking part in societal activities.[^58]
If the “vaccine passport” were to limit access to services or spaces,
there is a significant risk of discrimination as not all people
currently can (or want) to be vaccinated (due to a lack of sufficient
does of vaccines, etc.). However, this concern is not universally
shared. For example, in Germany, where there is a discussion whether
vaccinated people should be exempt from infection prevention
restrictions, the Federal Minister of Justice Christine Lambrecht has
pointed out that lifting fundamental rights restrictions once they
become disproportionate does not a constitute an unjustified privileged
treatment, pointing out that it is not the exercise of fundamental
rights that requires justification, but rather their (continued)
restriction.[^59]

Moreover, people of different religious groups and their standpoints
towards vaccination is also a sensitive matter that has to be taken into
account, as the document would likely discriminate against this category
of people. It has also been pointed out that in developing countries
people living in remote areas are likely to remain disadvantaged as some
of them may also not be able to access the vaccine or even afford
it.[^60]

In discussing potential public space restrictions on the basis of the
“vaccine passport”, it is important to bear in mind European Court of
Human Rights (ECtHR) case law in relation to *de facto* mandatory
vaccinations. Prior vaccination should not be the prerequisite for the
exercise of fundamental rights, such as the right to education or the
right to work. It was highlighted that Greece has been condemned by the
ECtHR in the case of *Sampanis and others v Greece* (2008, 2012) in
which the head teachers of two primary schools in Aspropyrgos refused
Roma parents the right to enrol their children on the basis of medical
reasons (they were afraid of the transmission of diseases since the
children had not been vaccinated). The Court found that the Greek
government violated article 14 of the ECtHR. In another important case –
that of *[Vavřička and others v the Czech
Republic](https://hudoc.echr.coe.int/app/conversion/pdf?library=ECHR&id=003-6600415-8750713&filename=Relinquishment%20in%20favor%20of%20the%20Grand%20Chamber%20Vavricka%20v.%20Czech%20Republic%20and%205%20other%20applications.pdf)*
– where the parents refused to submit to the legal obligation to
vaccinate their children because they considered, in substance, that
such a vaccination was against the interests of their children, they
were sanctioned, denied permission to set up a privately run school and
their children were denied enrolment in a public nursery school.
Although the Grand Chamber has not yet issued its decision on* Vavřička
and others v the Czech Republic* (which will clarify the ECtHR’s view on
mandatory vaccination and the consequences of one’s refusal to comply
with the national legislation thereon), earlier relevant jurisprudence
does not leave much room for assumptions (*Acmanne and others v.
Belgium, Solomakhin v Ukraine*) – vaccination is a medical treatment
which demands prior consent and a legitimate goal.[^61]

Another danger that has been highlighted in relation to the “vaccine
passport” is that introducing special privileges for the future
“passport holders” might in some countries encourage unrest due to the
discriminatory effects that this policy could cause. Additionally, if
governments begin to request this kind of document, it will encourage
private companies to demand it for other activities, with the consequent
discriminatory effect on the population. As proof of this, the example
of the German ticket company Eventim was brought up, noting that the
company had already revamped its online booking service to allow for
customers to upload proof that they had been vaccinated in anticipation
that organisers of events from concerts to sports tournaments will in
future require it as a condition of entry.[^62]

Due to the abovementioned concerns, it is vital to define with
sufficient precision and clarity the purposes for which any such
vaccination certificates are to be used, the right to get vaccinated (or
to stay unvaccinated), as well as alternative ways for gaining access to
the same goods (spaces, services) and this information on legal aspects
should be accessible to the public.[^63] It has also been noted that
prior to adopting a system of „vaccine passports“, in order to avoid
discrimination, all key stakeholders should be engaged with and
governments should co-ordinate with the WHO on the matter.[^64]

The Existence of a Normative Basis for Obliging Private Companies to Enforce Restrictions Originating from the “Vaccine Passport”
=================================================================================================================================

The study indicates the complete absence of the normative basis in
national legal systems which would obligate private companies to enforce
restrictions originating from the “vaccine passport”. In addition to
noting such an absence, the respondents from different countries have
pointed to some legislative and administrative aspects. For example,
Finland has a prohibition to delegate administrative tasks to private
entities. Private entities in Lithuania are expected to seek assistance
from the public authorities for enforcing restrictions originating from
law. Spain reported the existence of a general legal framework for
private enforcement of restrictions if there is a public interest.

Eight countries or areas have reported no discussion in legal circles
about legality or even constitutionality of such obligation.[^65] In
Lithuania is an ongoing discussion as to the constitutionality of
paramilitary entities’ right to enforce restrictions to fundamental
rights. Greece has a large-scale discussion regarding whether some
airlines or shipping companies should be obliged to ask for vaccination
“passports”. Nobody seems to be in favour of this position in public
dialogue at present.

A related issue is whether, in the absence of a legally binding
requirement to enforce the “vaccine passport” when deciding who has and
who has no access to privately provided services, the private companies
have the legal discretion to make these dividing decisions on their own
volition. In the other words, this is not a question of legal obligation
to discriminate, but legally allowed freedom to discriminate. It appears
that some countries see such debates and we have reason to assume that
such discussions will emerge within a relatively short period of time,
therefore the comparative results of this study may soon not represent
the reality. However, we believe that the essence of ongoing and
geographically spreading debates will have similar focus points. For the
purposes of the current study, Romania claims that it is possible for
private parties to establish rules they consider necessary if this is
not explicitly prohibited by law. Under the current legal situation, it
would be difficult to prohibit a restaurant owner to only offer services
to vaccinated people if he or she wants to do so in Romania. German
ministries have not developed a clear position regarding the question of
whether private companies are allowed to exclude non-vaccinated people
from events or travel. The Federal Ministry of Justice recently stated
that this depends on “a multitude of factors about which no reliable
statement can be made at this point in time”.[^66] In Estonia, some
practising lawyers have initiated a narrative on social media that
private individuals and companies are principally allowed to decide with
whom they want to do business.

The Existence of a Normative Basis to Impose Restrictions on the Basis of the “Vaccine Passport” in the Exercise of Fundamental Rights in Public Space and Accessing Public Services
====================================================================================================================================================================================

In most participating countries, there has been no thorough analysis as
to whether a normative basis exists to restrict fundamental rights
through the requirement of having a “vaccine passport” to access certain
locations or services.[^67] Most countries have not enacted concrete
legislative acts or provisions to deal with a pandemic of this scale and
magnitude.[^68] In Italy, the Vice-President of the Data Protection
Authority has maintained that a “vaccine passport” is unlawful, under
the current Italian legal framework, unless *ad hoc* legislation is
passed. The Vice-President highlighted that there is no obligation to
accept treatment in the form of vaccination and therefore it should be
thoroughly examined whether someone could suffer any kind of
consequences from the choice of not submitting him/herself to
vaccination.[^69]

Some academics have pointed to the fact that the bases for a “regular”
balancing of rights could be used in this context.[^70] It is quite
common to have constitutional provisions that allow for the restriction
of certain human rights in specified conditions. For example, the
Serbian Constitution provides a normative basis, which could be utilised
in the case of the “vaccine passport” – its Article 39, which regulates
freedom of movement, states that “\[f\]reedom of movement and residence,
as well as the right to leave the Republic of Serbia, may be restricted
by the law if necessary for \[...\] prevention of spreading contagious
diseases \[...\]” (Article 39 (2)(b)).[^71]

*Case Study of Lithuania*[^72]

In Lithuania there is an ongoing debate in legal circles concerning
whether the special legal regime presently applied in the country
provides a sufficient legal basis for the various restrictions that are
applied in connection with the declared quarantine. Prof. E. Šileikis
claims that currently imposed restrictions (e.g., of movement between
municipalities) are not legitimate, as an emergency (*ekstremali
situacija*, *karantinas*) in Lithuania has not been declared under the
Law on Public Emergency (*Nepaprastosios padėties įstatymas*) in which
case it would have been declared by the parliament and would provide a
proper legal basis for far-reaching restrictions. Assoc. prof. V.
Vaičaitis holds that restrictions currently imposed in Lithuania by the
government by means of its resolutions (*nutarimas*) go beyond what is
permitted by the currently applied Law on Prevention and Control of
Communicable Diseases in Humans (*Užkrečiamųjų ligų profilaktikos ir
kontrolės įstatymas*) and the Law on Civil Protection (*Civilinės saugos
įstatymas*), but the situation could be rectified by amending the law.
There is some disagreement in legal circles on whether a public
emergency should be declared by the parliament or whether the formally
more lenient legal regime is sufficient in the current conditions.[^73]
Similar questions could be raised with regard to potential vaccine
certificates and resulting restrictions for those not in possession of
them.

If vaccine certificates were also to be required after the pandemic and,
consequently, after the revocation of the special legal regime of
emergency of one kind or another, the requirement to have vaccine
certificates would raise questions of a different kind, similar to the
one of whether there is a legal basis to admit to nursery schools the
children whose parents refuse to have their children vaccinated (unless
there are counterindications) with standard vaccines (against measles,
rubella, poliomyelitis). The Supreme Administrative Court of Lithuania
in 2016 (case no. I-6-662/2016) found a requirement to have children
vaccinated unconstitutional but, in that particular case, only because
such a requirement in Lithuania stemmed not from a law adopted by the
parliament but rather from a hygiene norm adopted by the Minister of
Health. The Court relied on the ECtHR case law and addressed the issue
of vaccination under Article 8 of the ECtHR holding that vaccination was
an interference with the physical integrity of a person, which fell
within the scope of the right to private life. Restrictions of this
right are possible but need to meet certain requirements including that
of having a proper domestic legal basis. As a result of the above Court
decision, the requirement of vaccines was dropped.

It is noteworthy that currently the Lithuanian Law on the Prevention and
Control of Communicable Diseases in Humans (Article 11 § 1) provides
that immunoprophylactic measures shall be administered upon the person’s
consent unless other legal acts provide otherwise. At present there are
no such laws (in line with the abovementioned case law, acts of a lesser
legal value would not suffice as a basis for an obligation to get
vaccinated). Furthermore, the government is currently opposed to the
idea of mandatory vaccination.[^74]

Some experts also hold that an additional provision in the law (adopted
by the parliament) would be required for linking access to certain
spaces and services with the possession of a vaccination certificate,
irrespective of whether vaccination itself is mandatory or not.
Alternatively, a new legal act by the EU could potentially provide the
necessary legal basis for such restrictions.

Main Practical Challenges and Fundamental Concerns – from a Human Rights Perspective – Connected with the Idea of the “Vaccine Passport”
========================================================================================================================================

For the purposes of academic scholarship, the challenges and concerns
put forward by respondents are not identified by countries, since these
issues are not country-specific, but instead substance-specific.

**Practical challenges** identified can be categorised as follows:

Difficulties in reaching a *political consensus* about the need for the
“vaccine passport”.

Challenge to provide a *legal framework* for the vaccine passport. This
challenge has also the aspect of the *exact content* of the “vaccine
passport”. A legal framework is needed to define the passport’s nature,
precise regulation, effects, procedure for obtaining and guarantees of
judicial protection. The matter of fragmented standards across the
countries may emerge.

Challenges related to *implementation.* This seems to be the main
practical challenge, as respondents refer to difficulties originating
from decentralised political and medical systems, making certain that
the idea of the passport does not disappear or transform in the midst of
administrative hurdles, as well as the unknown costs involved with
initiating such system.

Challenges related to *safeguards* during implementation. These are
primarily concerns about the purposeful use of gathered medical data.
The data should not pass to the hands of private companies, become an
instrument for discrimination in employment activities.

**Fundamental concerns**

The main concern is that the vaccine passport can lead to everyday
discriminatory choices by individuals, the public, and private entities,
which in turn become deeply rooted discriminatory patterns either in
practice or law or both. Respondents point out that discrimination can
have several levels – it can either occur within a specific country, or
within the EU, or we can also speak of global discrimination patterns.
Discrimination can have horizontal and vertical dimension.

Horizontal discrimination means that the “vaccine passport” can lead to
“private” profiling and the exploitation of vulnerabilities for
commercial purposes.

Vertical discrimination means that in some form or another “public
lists” will be created. This in itself is a practice against the notion
of privacy. Respondents point out that if “vaccine passports” are
finally adopted, these carry a new national or regional or global
prejudice against young people, pregnant women and individuals with
previous medical conditions. The global divide between the rich and the
poor may deepen.

Availability of alternative forms of participation to those who do not
carry the passport (mask wearing obligation, quarantine) is emphasised.
The issue of alternatives also involves the vertical and horizontal
dimension.

From a purely rights perspective, the possibility of a “vaccine
passport” which can have a decisive effect if some doors are opened or
remain closed to rights holders, is connected to questions about the
scope and universality of some concrete human rights. The right to
privacy contains the specific right to say no to medical treatment.
Contemporary scholarship does not exclude that there is also a right not
to know one’s medical condition, which by default excludes disease
testing and vaccination. If the “vaccine passport” becomes a universal
instrument of social control enabling full participation for some and
blocking others out, then the decision as to whether to get vaccinated
or not may no longer be a matter of free choice but rather a recognition
of necessity. The view from human rights scholarship points to the
absolute nature of the right to refuse medical treatment and not to know
one’s medical condition, which does not become compromised due to the
utilitarian need for social participation.

Recommendations
===============

The main challenge is how to minimise the possibility of discrimination
coming hand in hand with the “vaccine passport”.

To avoid potential discrimination in providing access to public venues
and services, alternative means of gaining access should be made
available (e.g. by showing a recent negative Covid-19 test result), so
that vaccination does not become *de facto* mandatory. Moreover, the
access restrictions should be justified and proportionate.

The EU and national governments should reach an agreement as soon as
possible on the legal framework and standards forming the basis of an EU
“vaccine passport”.

States should refrain from moving vigorously ahead with their national
norm creation in order to avoid EU wide fragmentation.

The general legal framework should contain safeguards against vertical
and horizontal profiling and discrimination, and provide, *inter alia*,
clear and legally binding operation model for private entities when
conditioning access to services upon the presentation of the “vaccine
passport”.

Data protection (GDPR) requirements need to be taken into consideration
in all – planning, legislative and implementation – stages of creating a
“vaccine passport”.

Annex 1. Questionnaire
======================

1.  In your country, is there discussion regarding an EU-wide
    “vaccination passport”?

If yes, then:

> - Do political parties support this idea? Please briefly give your
> main arguments.
>
> - Do private companies support this idea? Please briefly give your
> main arguments.
>
> - What is the perception in the media? Please briefly give your main
> arguments.
>
> When replying to the previous question, please address what are the
> (positive and negative) factors that are mentioned in connection with
> the “vaccine passport” idea?

1.  Is there an e-health system (that could be utilised in connection
    with the vaccination passport)? Is this system based on blockchain
    or other comparable technology and what (if any) safeguards are
    built into the system to safeguard the right to privacy? (In
    concrete terms, you may comment on what is the country’s reaction to
    such technology or are there competing technologies?)

2.  Can you provide input for our recommendations regarding this issue –
    especially commenting on the matter of whether giving up privacy in
    exchange for alleged increased protection of the health of the
    general protection creates fundamental and/or practical challenges
    of human rights protection. What are these challenges in particular?

3.  Is there a normative basis which would obligate private companies to
    enforce restrictions originating from the “vaccine passport”? If
    not, are these being worked out or is there respective discussion in
    legal circles? Concrete examples would be excellent.

4.  Is there a normative basis to impose restrictions on the basis of
    the “vaccine passport” in the exercise of fundamental rights in
    public space and accessing public services? If not, are these being
    worked out or is there respective discussion in legal circles?
    Concrete examples would be excellent.

5.  Can you please identify and briefly comment on two main practical
    challenges and two main fundamental concerns – from a human rights
    perspective – connected with the idea of the “vaccine passport”.
    (For example, how to store respective information, whether to store
    and manage data for those who are not vaccinated, are there any
    challenges related to enforcement?)

6.  In your view, is there a need for such an instrument? If no, please
    comment. If yes, how can we simultaneously guarantee fundamental
    rights?

7.  In your view, does the rhetorical (positive) aspect of the proposed
    “vaccine passport” overshadow the fundamental concerns? Briefly
    comment.

[]{#_a8ah2x6x930b .anchor}

[^1]: As of February 2021, discussions were taking place in Estonia,
    Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Lithuania, Malta, Romania,
    Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, United Kingdom; but lacking in:
    Argentina, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyprus, Iceland, Ireland,
    Portugal, Serbia, South Africa, Turkey.

[^2]: Question 1, submissions from South Africa and Argentina.

[^3]: Question 1, submissions from Portugal, where at the start of
    February only around 3.57 percent of people were vaccinated
    (<https://www.theportugalnews.com/news/2021-02-03/slow-roll-out-of-vaccines-in-portugal/58036>)
    and Bosnia and Herzegovina, which highlights that the first phase of
    vaccination had not started until February 12, due to the complex
    political and constitutional structure and the failure of
    authorities to reach a timely agreement on the state-led procurement
    of vaccines.

[^4]: Question 1, submissions from Cyprus, Slovenia, Iceland, Ireland
    and Serbia.

[^5]: Question 1, submissions from France, Estonia, Italy, Portugal,
    Malta (referring to Cilia, Jonathan. “Immunity Passport For
    Vaccinated Malta Citizens On The Cards, Chris Fearne Confirms“.
    *Lovin Malta*. 26 December 2020.
    &lt;<https://lovinmalta.com/news/immunity-passport-for-vaccinated-malta-citizens-on-the-cards-chris-fearne-confirms/>&gt;
    Accessed: 09 February 2021).

[^6]: RTVE.es. Agencies.Coronavirus El pasaporte de vacunación para
    viajar sin restricciones divide a los países de la UE . 18.01.2021.
    Retrieved from RTVE nacional public media
    [*https://www.rtve.es/noticias/20210118/coronavirus-pasaporte-vacunacion-union-europea/2067142.shtml*](https://www.rtve.es/noticias/20210118/coronavirus-pasaporte-vacunacion-union-europea/2067142.shtml)

[^7]: Andres Gil. Spanish correspondent in Brussels. 15/01/2021. La UE
    apuesta por un 'pasaporte de vacunación' para agilizar los viajes en
    medio del retraso en la campaña de inmunización. El diario.es.
    Retrieved from
    [*https://www.eldiario.es/internacional/ue-apuesta-pasaporte-covid-facilitar-viajes-medio-retraso-campana-vacunacion\_1\_6800040.html*](https://www.eldiario.es/internacional/ue-apuesta-pasaporte-covid-facilitar-viajes-medio-retraso-campana-vacunacion_1_6800040.html)

[^8]: Question 1, submission from Malta, referring to Diacono, Tim.
    “Chris Fearne And Roberta Metsola Urge EU To Create COVID-19
    ‘Vaccine Passports’ For Travel Across Europe“*. Lovin Malta.* 14
    January 2021.
    &lt;<https://lovinmalta.com/lifestyle/health/covid-19/chris-fearne-and-roberta-metsola-urge-eu-to-create-covid-19-vaccine-passports-for-travel-across-europe/>&gt;
    Accessed 09 February 2021.

[^9]: Question 1, submission from Cyprus.

[^10]: Question 1, submission from Germany, referring to information
    available at:
    <https://www.ksta.de/politik/impfpaesse-in-corona-zeiten-spd-will-die-ausweise-faelschungssicher-machen-37770562?cb=1613833581044>

[^11]: This is the position of, e.g., Lithuanian MEP Petras
    Auštrevičius; information available at:
    <https://www.15min.lt/pasaulis-kiseneje/naujiena/kelioniu-pulsas/kada-galime-sulaukti-skiepu-paso-su-irasu-apie-vakcina-nuo-covid-19-637-1451382>
    , 05/02/2021; G. Jaruševičiūtė, ELTA,
    <https://madeinvilnius.lt/naujienos/aktualijos/skiepu-pasas-es-mastu-galetu-buti-ivestas-tik-paskiepijus-didziaja-dali-populiacijos/>
    , 05/02/2021.

[^12]: Question 1, submissions from Lithuania and Germany (referring to
    information available at:
    <https://www.welt.de/politik/ausland/article224674287/Corona-Sondergipfel-Kommt-der-EU-Impfpass-und-wie-soll-er-funktionieren.html>).

[^13]: Question 1, submissions from Lithuania, Serbia (referring to Blic
    online,
    (https://www.blic.rs/vesti/drustvo/slabe-su-sanse-brnabic-dva-su-razloga-zbog-kojih-mislim-da-
    uvodenje-kovid-pasosa-nije/lb0h5pe 21.01.2021).

[^14]: RTVE.es. Agencies.18.01.2021. Coronavirus El pasaporte de
    vacunación para viajar sin restricciones divide a los países de la
    UE, available at
    [*https://www.rtve.es/noticias/20210118/coronavirus-pasaporte-vacunacion-union-europea/2067142.shtml*](https://www.rtve.es/noticias/20210118/coronavirus-pasaporte-vacunacion-union-europea/2067142.shtml)
    and Irene Martel. ABC. 20/01/2021. Qué es el pasaporte sanitario de
    vacunación, available at
    <https://www.abc.es/sociedad/abci-que-es-pasaporte-sanitario-comun-vacunacion-nsv-202101201132_noticia.html?ref=https:%2F%2Fwww.google.com%2F>.
    The aspect of not all states being able to procure a sufficient
    amount of vaccine doses for their citizens leading to discrimination
    is also pointed out in the submission of Albania in relation to
    Question 1.

[^15]: Question 1, submission from Lithuania, referring to
    <https://www.vz.lt/verslo-aplinka/2021/01/13/premjere-koronaviruso-imuniteto-pasas--velesnio-laiko-projektas>,
    13/01/2021,
    <https://www.15min.lt/pasaulis-kiseneje/naujiena/kelioniu-pulsas/kada-galime-sulaukti-skiepu-paso-su-irasu-apie-vakcina-nuo-covid-19-637-1451382>
    , 05/02/2021; G. Jaruševičiūtė, ELTA,
    <https://madeinvilnius.lt/naujienos/aktualijos/skiepu-pasas-es-mastu-galetu-buti-ivestas-tik-paskiepijus-didziaja-dali-populiacijos/>
    , 05/02/2021.

[^16]: Question 1, submission from Serbia, referring to information by
    BETA News Agency, available at
    https://beta.rs/vesti/covid-19/140123-ivanusa-mnoge-zemlje-imaju-manje-vakcina-
    nego-srbija 18.01.2021.

[^17]: Top News – Pasaporta dixhitale e vaksinimit/ Ish-ministri i
    shëndetësisë-do e dëmtonte BE-në, 19.02.2021. Available at:
    <https://top-channel.tv/video/top-news-pasaporta-dixhitale-e-vaksinimit-ish-ministri-i-shendetesise-do-e-demtonte-be-ne/>.
    \[Accessed on 22 February 2021\].

[^18]: Question 1, submission from Germany, referring to information
    available at:
    <https://www.lto.de/recht/nachrichten/n/ethikrat-besondere-regeln-geimpfte-aufhebung-beschraenkungen-infektionsschutz/>

[^19]: Question 1, submission from Germany.

[^20]: Question 1, submission from Spain.

[^21]: Question 1, submission from Spain, referring to information
    available at: Irene Martel. ABC. 20/01/2021. Qué es el pasaporte
    sanitario de vacunación. Retrieved from
    https://www.abc.es/sociedad/abci-que-es-pasaporte-sanitario-comun-vacunacion-nsv-202101201132\_noticia.html?ref=https:%2F%2Fwww.google.com%2F

[^22]: Question 1, e.g. submission from Slovenia.

[^23]: <https://www.francetvinfo.fr/sante/maladie/coronavirus/covid-19-une-deputee-udi-propose-un-passeport-vert-pour-les-personnes-vaccinees_4222333.html>.

[^24]: See, e.g.,
    <https://www.francetvinfo.fr/replay-radio/le-brief-politique/covid-19-une-deputee-propose-le-passeport-sanitaire-pour-relancer-le-tourisme_4274577.html>.

[^25]: Question 1, submission from France.

[^26]: <https://www.tagesschau.de/inland/spahn-corona-immunitaetsausweis-101.html>.

[^27]: Question 1, submission from Germany.

[^28]: The exception here is Greece, where two of the opposition
    political parties (Syriza and Helliniki Lisi) clearly announced that
    they are against the government’s policy and its proposal for the
    vaccination passport (without setting clear arguments against the
    vaccination passport in the public dialogue), after the EU rejected
    the Greek prime minister’s proposal for the vaccination passport:
    Question 1, submission from Greece.

[^29]: Question 1, submission from Germany, referring to information
    available at:
    <https://www.zdf.de/nachrichten/politik/eu-gipfel-coronavirus-grenzen-impfung-100.html>

[^30]: Question 1, submission from Slovakia, referring to information
    available at: Pravda 18.3.2021: [Klus: Očkovacie pasy by mali byť
    predbežne pripravené na letnú sezónu - Domáce - Správy -
    Pravda.sk](https://spravy.pravda.sk/domace/clanok/581653-klus-ockovacie-pasy-by-mali-byt-predbezne-pripravene-na-letnu-sezonu/)

[^31]: *Ibid.*

[^32]: Question 1, submission from Greece.

[^33]: *Ibid*.

[^34]: Question 1, submissions from, e.g., Bosnia and Herzegovina,
    Finland, Greece, Italy, Lithuania.

[^35]: <https://cincodias.elpais.com/cincodias/2021/01/19/companias/1611060654_337047.html>.

[^36]: Question 1, submission from Germany, referring to information
    available at:
    <https://www.rnd.de/reise/urlaubs-vorteil-durch-corona-impfung-was-auf-reisende-zukommt-6GDIO4D5IREBNH7AW2GE36GHSA.html>.

[^37]: Question 1, submission from Finland.

[^38]: Question 1, submission from Italy.

[^39]: Question 1, submission from Bosnia and Herzegovina, referring to
    information available at:
    <https://rtvtk.ba/covid-pasosi-rjesenje-ili-dodatno-opterecenje/>
    accessed on 14 February 2021

[^40]: Question 1, submission from Malta, referring to “Vaccine
    certificate should not be only way to travel – MHRA”. *Times of
    Malta.*15 January 2021, available at
    <https://timesofmalta.com/articles/view/vaccine-certificate-should-not-be-only-criteria-allowing-one-to-travel.845091>.

[^41]: <https://www.is.fi/kotimaa/art-2000007805273.html>

[^42]: <https://www.rnd.de/reise/neustart-nach-drei-monaten-hotel-schliessung-regelchaos-muss-vermieden-werden-5BEC4G3FOJA3DOM3E5HPL3BMYM.html>.

[^43]: Question 1, submission from Greece.

[^44]: Question 1, submission from Finland. Information referred to in
    the submission is available online at:
    <https://stm.fi/en/-/finland-is-preparing-introduction-of-digital-covid-19-vaccination-certificate>.

[^45]: *Projet de loi nº 3714 déposé le 21 décembre 2020 instituant un
    régime pérenne de gestion des urgences sanitaires*:
    <https://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/dyn/15/textes/l15b3714_projet-loi>.

[^46]: Question 1, submission from France. Data available online at:
    <https://www.ipsos.com/en/global-attitudes-covid-19-vaccine-december-2020>.

[^47]: Question 3, submissions from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany,
    Estonia.

[^48]: Question 3, submission from Lithuania.

[^49]: Question 3, submission from Germany.

[^50]: Question 3, submissions from Greece, Slovenia and Argentina.

[^51]: This is highlighted in relation to Question 3 in the submission
    from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

[^52]: Question 3, submission from Lithuania.

[^53]: Question 3, submission from Cyprus.

[^54]: Question 3, submission from Portugal.

[^55]: Question 3, submission from Italy.

[^56]: Question 3, submission from Lithuania.

[^57]: Question 3, submission from Albania.

[^58]: Question 3, submission from Germany, referring to information
    available at:
    <https://www.tagesschau.de/inland/spahn-corona-immunitaetsausweis-101.html>

[^59]: Question 5, submission from Germany, referring to information
    available at:
    <https://www.tagesschau.de/inland/rechte-geimpfte-101.html>.

[^60]: Question 3, submission from Albania.

[^61]: Question 5, submission from Cyprus.

[^62]: Question 3, submission from Argentina.

[^63]: Question 3, submission from Lithuania.

[^64]: Submission from the United Kingdom, referring to Recommendation 1
    from Ada Lovelace Institute (2021), „What place should COVID-19
    vaccine passports have in society? Findings from a rapid expert
    deliberation chaired by Professor Sir Jonathan Montgomery“,
    available at:
    https://www.adalovelaceinstitute.org/summary/covid-19-vaccine-passports/.

[^65]: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy, Slovenia, Latin America, Portugal,
    Serbia, Malta, France

[^66]: <https://www.airliners.de/eu-impfpass-funktionieren/59025>

[^67]: Question 5, submissions, e.g., from Finland, France, Malta,
    Portugal.

[^68]: Question 5, submissions, e.g., from Albania, Bosnia and
    Herzegovina, Greece, Romania.

[^69]: Question 5, submission from Italy, referring to information
    available at: Ginevra Cerrina Feroni, Pass vaccinali illegittimi
    senza una legge ad hoc, Il Messaggero, 1 March 2021, available
    at <https://www.garanteprivacy.it/web/guest/home/docweb/-/docweb-display/docweb/9550463>.

[^70]: E.g., question 5, submission from Spain.

[^71]: Question 5, submission from Serbia.

[^72]: Question 5, submission from Lithuania.

[^73]: Vilnius University Faculty of Law conference, 04/02/2021,
    <http://www.teise.pro/index.php/2021/02/05/covid-19-pandemija-issukiai-zmogaus-teisems-demokratijai-ir-teisines-valstybes-principams/>.

[^74]: D. Nagelė,
    <https://www.respublika.lt/lt/naujienos/mokslas/sveikata/vyriausybe__pries_privalomus_skiepus/>,
    22/01/2021.
