# Executive Summary

- Nine GDHRNet members participated in the survey. Of these participants, seven report on EU member states (Austria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Finland, Germany, Italy, Portugal), and two on non-EU member states (Moldova, and Serbia). 
- The DSA is at the heart of European platform regulation. However, they are not the only legislative Act that platforms have to consider when conducting their respective business. Several EU legislative acts apply to platforms (just to mention a few: the Audiovisual Media Services Directive, the General Data Protection Regulation, the E-Commerce-Directive, or the DSM Directive). National legislation is heavily influenced by EU legislation. Especially the reports on non-EU member states show the relevance of mere national legislation which is however partly influenced by EU regulation through the “Brussels Effect”.
- The DSA is known as a legislative act that shall guard fundamental rights and public values on platforms. Some national developments point to a similar direction, for example national legislation such as the Portuguese Charter of Human Rights in the Digital Era or German court rulings.
- The DSA includes a liability exemption regime for platforms which mirrors the regime already introduced by the E-Commerce Directive. The report on Moldova, although not an EU member, shows that a similar regime is in place.
- The DSA includes obligations relating to terms of services of platforms (see Art 14 DSA). Several other obligations are relevant mainly for EU member states, most notably the Unfair Terms Directive, the AVMS Directive, or the DSM Directive. These Directives include obligations also relating to terms of services of platforms and have to be considered as well.
- Similar to terms of services, several legislative acts (pre-dating the DSA) concern algorithmic recommender systems. There is also national legislation – such as the Portuguese Charter of Human Rights in the Digital Era or the German Medienstaatsvertrag – relating to algorithmic recommender systems. Most provisions in place concern the transparency of algorithmic recommender systems.
- The DSA introduces several transparency obligations that vary depending on the type of service provider. There are also other transparency obligations in place that concern platforms, although mostly limited to certain areas such as the public sector.
- Specific DSA obligations refer to the transparency of online advertising. Several reports show that advertising is heavily regulated outside the DSA, for example through prohibitions of hidden or misleading advertising. These provisions do not focus on platforms but may be applied to them as well.
- Under the DSA, VLOPs and VLOSEs are required to provide access to certain information. This kind of data access is new to most states reported on; only Germany had a similar provision in place before the DSA. There are other European legislative acts such as the Open Data Directive which aim at providing access to certain data. The focus of such already existing legislation is on the public sector. 
- The DSA introduces a systemic risk assessment for VLOPs and VLOSEs. Risk assessment obligations are a known instrument in several states: for example, Finland has a risk assessment mechanism in place that concerns cyber threats. On the EU level, the GDPR introduced a data protection impact assessment.
